*NB:* I am a queer scholar in solar engineering and sustainability systems. I identify as transgender (non-binary), and as an artist situated in STEAM (Science Technology Engineering Art Mathematics). My accepted pronouns are they/them/their. I use only Jeffrey or Frey.

**Solar Ecology & Stakeholder Engagement** 
My body of work (re)configures what it means to “do solar” with photovoltaic power—(re)turning to sunlight, stakeholders, and locale through the natureculture of farming.  My career in solar scholarship is grounded by centuries of human (and inhuman) practices of living and thriving with light transformations (e.g. photosynthesis, cloud evolution, human vision, and photovoltaics today).

On Sept. 6, 2019, I attended the groundbreaking of Penn State’s 70 MW photovoltaic farm, joined by four female students of our 22-person Solar Collaborative. The celebratory event included comments from Governor Tom Wolf and President Eric Barron. The 500-acre solar farm will be the largest in PA to date, providing Penn State with 25% of their total electricity demand across all campuses, and surpassing their carbon reduction goals (to be completed by mid-2020). This same project will deliver back a minimum of $14 million in permanent monies to Penn State University, along with decades of educational and research opportunities. This physically significant project is a direct outcome of my research practices, my teaching, and my collective action work serving Penn State and the Commonwealth.

My current academic home is known internationally for fossil fuel endeavors: mining, oil and gas production, post-extractive environmental remediation, and fuel combustion. My work through Solar Ecology and Stakeholder Engagement is oriented in total opposition to those energy narratives. And yet the resilience of my work at Penn State has evolved as a result of the tension pulling against these massive intergenerational norms of resource extraction and remediation. I hold the tools to enable society to adapt with the emergent systems boom of grid-scale solar farming, developed for this appropriate time of climates changed. 

My work through Solar Ecology and Stakeholder Engagement “matters” in three senses: 1) as strategically important engineering research for sustainable systems implementation and adaptation, 2) as the frontier solar engineering research team in the USA that anticipated the massive solar boom starting in 2018, and created an international network to prepare Penn State graduates for leadership roles in the solar field, and 3) through the touchable material outcomes marking shifts in the physical infrastructure, the energy portfolio, and the identity of the Pennsylvania State as the Energy University.  12 years, 3 solar farms, 1 solar bus stop, 1 solar home, and over 1000 solar design students later, I remain the sole solar engineering faculty for the schools of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.

I am developing my future work in transdisciplinary scholarship, linked with the next solar ecology. In order to accomplish this arc, I have been coordinating with industry, The Nature Conservancy, and Penn State University (the Sustainability Institute, and C&F Development). My target will be the development of a research-based national standards and certification program, to inform solar farming with respect to soil health, pollinator habitat, water retention, and community economic development. The call for action is called SEED: “Solar Ecology Exchange + Design.” Having found successful methods to catalyze and support research and engagement, I want to work to communicate, implement, and expand sustainable, regenerative solar solutions that enrich our lives and biomes.

**Research:**
My work in solar spans a long supply chain, from upstream solar photovoltaic materials to downstream solar goods (buildings, photovoltaic rooftops and farms, pyranometers) and services. I researched tin sulfide materials for over a decade in close collaboration with peers at NREL, Penn State, and the University of Freiburg. A sample of that cumulative body of work is represented in a 2016 review paper (cf. Banai et. al). In order to maintain an sustained arc of funded research, I diversified my research to include building systems science and irradiation monitoring through the DOE 2009 Solar Decathlon and the DOE Philadelphia Energy Efficient Buildings Hub. My research evolved to include early GIS integration with techno-economic performance modeling (Choi et. al, 2011), and solar irradiance monitoring (Rayl et. al, 2013). I studied the system dynamics driving solar energy conversion and established the role of electricity pricing and solar variability in managing portfolios of solar farms, years ahead of grid-scale solar farm development (Brownson, 2013; Kumpf et al., 2015). My research led to open-source technologies for solar irradiance detectors (Project SID) out of a pragmatic need for short time scale, directional irradiance inputs for our GIS and techno-economic modeling (Srikrishnan et al., 2015). 

Following the first edition of my textbook (Brownson, 2013), I published the results of a short analysis of photovoltaics on medium-sized multi-tenant buildings, which included exploring solar goods and services as common pool resources (cf. Brownson, Buildings, 2013). I hypothesized that an integrative design process (traditionally used for green buildings) would catalyze community-led solar projects previously unseen in PA. I leveraged $56k in competitive funding (ReInvention Fund) to establish “Community Solar on State” as a transdisciplinary co-creative workspace. By 2018, two large community solar projects emerged from our work—2.5 MW community farm at the wastewater treatment authority and 2.0 MW on the University Park campus (Orchard Rd). These projects reinforced a research arc in Stakeholder Engagement, investigating workshops as finite repeated cooperative games to form locally-defined and -managed common pool resources (Ferster et al., accepted Nov. 11, 2019). My textbook is now being co-authored by myself and Dr. Gretchen Macht of the University of Rhode Island for the second edition (expected submission in Fall 2021).

My successes with integrative design, common pool resource management, and creative enterprise were leveraged again to facilitate statewide workshops for “Finding Pennsylvania’s Solar Future,” a DoE SunShot project (completed June 30, 2019). I was the sole academic partner. We applied my established integrative design process among 500+ diverse stakeholders. Stakeholders from multiple sectors explored likely pathways for photovoltaics to support 10% of in-state electricity demand by 2030. The co-authored technical document includes strategies for solar expansion (cf. Altoff et. al, 2018;  PA DEP site—https://t.co/xwcyC1lFSe). I was able to leverage that role as a solar leader to next guide the call for a large solar farm at Penn State, prioritizing Solar Ecology. The collective findings of all of these outcomes of integrative design were presented at “4S 2018” in Sydney, Australia (“Commons Wealth: Integrative Design Catalyzing Community Solar from Uni, to Muni, to State”).

Most recently, I am developing my next arc of work in transdisciplinary scholarship. I am serving as the only energy faculty lead on a $3M funded NSF Research Traineeship program for transdisciplinarity, bringing my work in solar ecology together with landscape ecology and landscape architecture. The project is “NRT-INFEWS: Landscape-U, Impactful partnerships among graduate students and managers for regenerative landscape design” (PI: E. Smithwick, PSU). I am co-authoring a chapter in the "Handbook of Distributed Team Cognition," entitled "Lenses of Diversity in Distributed Teams," in which I contributed content in intersectionality and embedded ethics of jointly intentional group agency. In 2019, I signed a contract with Johns Hopkins Press to author a trade book on solar ecology as it has affected transdisciplinary traces through natureculture in history. The draft title of the book is "Solar Ecology: Stories of Revolution" (expected submission in Spring 2021).

**Education:** 
As one of the first faculty to enter the field in the USA within this new generation, I am uniquely positioned with 12 years of teaching experience surrounding solar technologies, energy systems simulations, solar resource assessment, modern thermodynamics, materials science, and project finance. I also developed internationally relevant undergraduate and graduate programming for solar energy science and project design through the "Energy & Sustainability Policy" undergraduate degree program (founder and program lead) and the "Renewable Energy & Sustainability Systems" professional master’s degree program and certificates (co-founder and solar program lead).

The future of solar energy’s rapid expansion ties directly to our ability to rapidly build human capacity and lower barriers to entry at all levels of education. When teaching, I foster a pragmatic, adaptive learning environment in all courses, addressing topics that students find relevant to their daily activities and current world events. I engage students in positive discussions and critical thinking, integrating ethics and case studies/stories into the dialogue for future engineering and business practitioners. In advanced courses, I emphasize skills in written and verbal communication, and public engagement, linked to homework reports and class design projects. 

Most recently I have approached pedagogy as a diffractive practice, in keeping with K. Barad’s (2006; Meeting the Universe Halfway) “intra-action” and “material-discursive practices”, work that superpositions quantum physics and critical theory (through feminist theory, queer theory, and decolonial thought). My surprise in the classroom the past two years has been the sheer delight that engineering students seem to get out of “going deep” into cases of light and society intra-acting across phenomena such as the Little Ice Age and the mid-Atlantic slave trade. This work is dovetailing with my own research goals for transdisciplinary scholarship for future generations of engineers.

**Community Engagement and Service:** 
In parallel with research among the Solar Collaborative, I have worked with the leadership of the Office of the Physical Plant at Penn State to enable solar project deployment; solar homes, site evaluations, as well as two solar farms. I serve in roles as facilitator/mediator/catalyst in my stakeholder engagement processes and my team collaborations. I bring teams together in unusual mixes from different circles of life, and guide conversations into constructive arcs in face-to-face discussions. In a room full of specialists and non-specialists, my goal is to make conversations easier and guide stakeholders to work within the design constraints of a co-developed purpose statement and principles of action. I document and report out the exchange of ideas, and work with complementary techno-economic models to evaluate the impacts of decision making.

The extension of my research and education has produced permanent systems now integral to the identity of Penn State as The Energy University, including:
— the 60+ year archive of the oldest solar organizations in the world now curated by Penn State Special Collections (Ben Goldman, 2015)
— the Solar Bus Stop and Solar Ecology Timeline next to Beaver Stadium (2015-2017)
— the 2 MW Orchard Road Solar Farm (9 acres, distributed installation, behind-the-meter for PSU, co-developed with Solar Ecology principles with OPP and Alternative Energy Development Group, 2018)
— the 70 MW Lightsource-BP Solar Farm (500 acres, grid-tied installation, co-developed through Solar Ecology principles with Sustainability Institute, OPP, and PRX Energy, 2019)

Within my profession, I have served on the Board of Directors for the American Solar Energy Society, and maintain a lifetime membership. I have been invited to speak broadly on solar energy in society among international audiences. Locations include venues across the USA, Burkina Faso (Keynote Speaker, AfricaSolar 2015), China, Germany, Mexico, and the UAE. Audiences enjoy my ability to convey the principles and great potential of solar energy in a common language, and relevant to their own context.